---
layout: post
title: Camp Phoenix construction projects
description: ""
thumbnail: "/assets/images/projects/camp/bridge.jpg"
---


When I was growing up, I attended various summer camps and I hated
most of them. I did tolerate one camp, however, and I ended up going
from a camper, to a counselor in training, and then eventually being
hired as part of the maintenance staff. I did do some traditional
maintenance tasks like cleaning up trash and mopping, but the majority
of my work was odd jobs around the camp. This culminated in two fairly
large construction projects which I worked on near the end of my time
at the camp. One of the more significant ones is a "legacy board"
which retiring counselors can sign as they leave. A picture of the
completed project is shown below. While it was not an overly technical
task, it was a major success and it greatly outperformed its
predecessors. In the past, counselors would create one of these boards
and the entire structure would rot within a few year. The one that I
built, however, is still standing strong to this day and I built it
all the way back in 2013.


![Legacy board](/assets/images/projects/camp/legacy-board.jpg)


The other major project that I completed was building a bridge over a
small stream. I examined designs of other foot bridges around town in
order to see what ones stood the test of time and which did not. This
project did not appear to be very important at the time because it
simply offered an additional side entrance into the main grounds of
the camp. However, a few years after I originally built it, they began
using it as the default entrance to the camp. The previous main
entrance has been closed due to nearby construction for quite some
time, so this bridge offers a convenient solution. This bridge has
also stood the test of time, and the camp has even used the small
bridge to drive trucks into the camp and has had no issues. It feels
quite rewarding to have left the camp with these somewhat permanent
objects and to be able to return from time to time and see that they
are still holding up strong.

![Bridge](/assets/images/projects/camp/bridge.jpg)
